---
title: What I've Been Up To Lately
date: "2:31pm 04/14/12"
categories:
  - news
tags:
  - c
  - c++
  - python

Before the blog update I hadn't done much in my site in about a month. However,
I didn't sit idle during that time. I mostly spent this time learning the C
programming language. I am currently in the middle of Zed Shaw's [Learn C the
Hard Way][learnc] tutorial, which has been absolutely fascinating. The inherent
"unsafeness" of C is a stark contrast to my Java background. Memory management
and type dangers sometimes make C programming a headache, and I've seen the
frustrating "segmentation fault" error occur more than a few times. However, my
C skill is at the point where I can implement basic data structures, which I am
quite proud of. Though I consider myself to have a working knowledge of C, I
want learn more about I/O and how to make efficient C programs.

As for class, I am learning C++. Though the language has its similarities to C,
I would definitely consider them different beasts. I am much more comfortable
with object oriented programming, so the transition has been relatively
painless. It is interesting how C++ and Java differ in their design
philosophies, and I see the advantages of both. More recently class has focused
on the differences between deep and shallow copying, and the errors associated
when the wrong copy is used. I successfully implemented a priority queue for my
assignment last week, and this week I am writing functions that will write and
read binary trees from files. C++ is a very powerful language. Its amazing how
many features are included by default, and I cant wait to learn more.

What's the next step? For my personal projects, I plan to continue development
of this site.  I still only have one project in my projects directory, which I
hope to attend to soon. Before the summer I hope to become more comfortable in
Python. I wish to create a simple turn-based fighting game in Python and upload
a working version soon. The game will use the Pygame library. Python is very
enticing to me; it has a vastly differnt style from other languages that I know
but it is a language that is *fun* to program in.

So thats how things are shaping up. Great things are still to come!

[learnc]: http://c.learncodethehardway.org/book/ "Learn C the Hard Way"
